Søren Kierkegaard was a brilliant, gloomy, anxiety-ridden, often hilarious Danish 19th-century philosopher… “Gloomy” and “anxiety-ridden” tend to emphasize the picture of Kierkegaard as the “melancholy Dane.” Simon Podmore helpfully explains that “this oft-repeated legend for Kierkegaard—‘the melancholy Dane’—represents a perception that only sees half the face, as it were, of one of modern theology and philosophy’s most insightful exponents of the triumph of faith over despair” (Kierkegaard and the Self Before God, p. xi). We see this in Kierkegaard’s journal and notebook entries on joy, and in his treatment of joy in Christian Discourses. We see it, too, in the empathetic and encouraging tone he takes when writing to his second cousin and to his sister-in-law, and in the friendly charm of his letters to Professor Kolderup-Rosenvinge and to his best friend Emil Boesen (see Letters and Documents, passim). It is important not to read Kierkegaard entirely through the lens of the bitter ‘Corsair affair’ and his scathing ‘attack on Christendom’. > …the author of 22 books… Although Kierkegaard authored far more than 22 works, many of them are perhaps not lengthy enough to count as a full-fledged “book.” So if we count some of his very brief works together as a single volume (as the Princeton editions do with Eighteen Upbuilding Discourses, Without Authority, and The Moment and Late Writings), then 22 or 23 books seems about accurate. But if we count everything he wrote regardless of length or completeness, the tally comes to at least 40—and that is not even counting his many letters and his voluminous journals and notebooks. > …of which three [Either/Or, Fear and Trembling, and The Sickness Unto Death] continue to make his name. It is easy to understand why Either/Or, Fear and Trembling, and The Sickness Unto Death should be singled out. It is not clear, however, why Philosophical Fragments, The Concept of Anxiety, Concluding Unscientific Postscript, and Two Ages: A Literary Review should not be. > He was born in an immensely wealthy family in Copenhagen in 1813, the youngest of seven children. “Immensely” may be a bit of an exaggeration, but I’m afraid I cannot say how much of one. > Death was around him constantly from a young age, and was to obsess him throughout his career. It is, in a sense, his only theme. “Obsess,” too, may be hyperbolic, and certainly taking death as Kierkegaard’s only theme is unhelpfully reductive. For consider the centrality of such themes as irony, indirect communication, despair, faith, love, the single individual, the God-relationship, the manifold self-deceptions of Christendom, and so on. Indeed, many of these are of greater importance to Kierkegaard than death itself. > Not only was he extremely physically frail, by the time he was 22 all his siblings had died, except for he and a brother [Peter Christian]. It drove him to furious production of books over 15 years. On a single day in 1843 he published no less than three works. It is not clear that this is the only or even the main reason for his productivity, though Kierkegaard does cite it as one of them. > He wasn’t writing for the money; he was working to save himself and, he thought, humanity. The first part is true, and there is a sense in which the second part is, too. But Kierkegaard ultimately holds that salvation comes from God. For though it must of course be worked out “with fear and trembling” (Phil. 2.12), Kierkegaard is no Pelagian, semi- or otherwise. He also does not consider himself responsible for others’ salvation, for on his view everyone is individually accountable to God; no one can lay the blame for one’s own moral failures on anyone but oneself.  > As it happened, he made it to the age of 42, then died of an excruciating spinal disease. Different diagnoses of Kierkegaard’s final condition have been put forth and speculated upon, but he does seem to have died due to progressive spinal paralysis (also known as acute ascending polyradiculitis). It has also been argued that he suffered from a form of epilepsy, though this remains a matter of speculation (as does whether his death would have been related to this epileptic condition). > In Either/Or and Fear and Trembling, what Kierkegaard wants us to do above all is wake up and give up our cozy, sentimental illusions. He systematically attacks the pillars of modern life: our faith in family, our trust in work, our attachment to love, and our general sense that life has purpose and meaning. Kierkegaard is not against these “pillars of modern life” per se, but he is vehemently opposed to our regarding them as pillars. Life—modern or otherwise—is more than these institutions and what they can offer us. Although Kierkegaard does not hold that life is without any “purpose and meaning,” he does maintain that these institutions cannot provide the ground for ultimate or absolute purpose and meaning. For him, that can be found only in the individual’s “God-relationship.” > His enemies were the smug in all their guises, particularly the prosperous Danish haute bourgeoisie, and the members of the established Danish Church. On his criticism of the established church, see especially Kierkegaard’s Practice in Christianity and The Moment and Late Writings. > He tells us, “As I grew up I opened my eyes and saw the real world, and I began to laugh, and I haven’t stopped since. I saw that the meaning of life was to get a livelihood, that the goal of life was to be a high court judge, that the brightest joy of love was to marry a well-off girl, … that wisdom was what the majority said it was, that passion was to give a speech, that courage was to risk being fined 10 [rix-]dollars, that cordiality was to say ‘You’re welcome’ after a meal, and that the fear of God was go to communion once a year. That’s what I saw, and I laughed.” These are not actually Kierkegaard’s words, but the words of his anonymous aesthete in Either/Or, Part I, in the “Diapsalmata.” On the importance of understanding Kierkegaard’s use of pseudonymity, see my reddit post “On the Existential Labyrinth of Kierkegaardian Pseudonymity,” the other posts linked to therein, and my response to Daphne Hampson’s recent errors concerning pseudonymity in “Daphne Hampson’s new book on Kierkegaard.” Kierkegaard would agree with much of what the aesthete writes here, but we will see below just one of the problems that arises when we fail to distinguish Kierkegaard from his fictive, pseudonymous characters (which are not to be regarded as mere pen names or deceptive guises for Kierkegaard to hide behind). Incidentally, I am unfamiliar with the above translation, but the passage is quoted from Robert Ferguson’s Life Lessons from Kierkegaard, and corresponds to the passage on pp. 33-34 of the Hongs’ popular translation. > Kierkegaard was especially caustic about the 19th-century understanding of love, and the new ideology of passionate marriage, which aimed to unite desire with prudence, and suggested that one could enjoy all the thrills of a love affair, and at the same time all the stability of a long-term relationship. But Kierkegaard mocked the notion that one could ever fuse romantic love with marriage, that one could have passion and sex and at the same time children, stability, and routine. He respected both; he just couldn’t believe that you could have them both at the same time, in a cozy marriage sanctified by the state and the neighbors. This is not so much Kierkegaard’s view as it is a misreading of the confrontation between the aesthetic and ethical life-views in Either/Or. In Part II of this work, the “ethical” Judge William indicates that the romantic love of the “aesthetic” retains its relative validity. The judge explains that the ethical does not annihilate the aesthetic, but reorients its telos, that it “does not want to destroy the esthetic but transfigure it” (Either/Or, II, p. 253). Similarly, in Works of Love Kierkegaard himself writes that our immediate inclinations and passions are not meant to be destroyed or abolished but “dethroned” (p. 45; cf. pp. 61-2) and “transform[ed]” (p. 139). What, then, is Kierkegaard’s main criticism of the marriage institution? It is that Christendom’s view of marriage as “a forward step in true religiousness” contradicts what he takes to be the biblical view, namely, that “because the world has now become so old and lechery so out of hand, it is no longer possible to live chastely outside of marriage and therefore marriage must be given a place” (JP 3: 2616; cf. 2621, 2624, 2629). Kierkegaard no doubt has in mind 1 Cor. 7:8-9. > His belief arose out of his own tortured love life. He fell in love with a beautiful, precocious, and talented 18-year-old girl called Regine Olsen, only then to break off the engagement, as he realized that to try and live with her forever would also mean killing the love that had drawn him to her. There are a couple of errors here. First, Kierkegaard actually met Regine in 1837 when she was 14 (and he was 24). He waited three years to propose marriage. Second, he broke the engagement not for the abstract reason given above, but rather appears to have had several motives for doing so: i) he felt that his severe depression hindered his ability to love her; ii) he felt that he would never be able to initiate her into his deepest sufferings, as the honesty of marriage would require; iii) he felt that giving her up was divine punishment (particular to his own situation); iv) he felt that she was religiously underdeveloped; and v) he felt that the single life would be more conducive to his calling as a religious author. (See, e.g., JP 6: 6472-73.) > Everywhere he turned, Kierkegaard saw intolerable incompatibilities and impossible choices. It led him to one memorable explosion in Either/Or: “Marry and you will regret it; don’t marry, you will also regret it. Marry or don’t marry, you will regret it either way. Laugh at the world’s foolishness, you will regret it; weep over it, you will regret that, too. … Hang yourself, you’ll regret it; don’t hang yourself, and you’ll regret that, too. Whether you hang yourself or don’t hang yourself, you will regret both. This, gentlemen, is the essence of all philosophy.” This quote, too, is from the aesthete’s “Diapsalmata” (Either/Or, I, pp. 38-39). Here we have a clear example of what happens when one ignores Kierkegaard’s pseudonymity and attempts to biographize the philosophy of his pseudonyms willy-nilly—something which Kierkegaard himself explicitly opposes: “Anyone who experiences anything primitively also experiences in ideality the possibilities of the same thing and the possibility of the opposite. These possibilities are his legitimate literary property. His own personal actuality, however, is not. His speaking and his producing are, in fact, born of silence. The ideal perfection of what he says and what he produces will correspond to his silence, and the supreme mark of that silence will be that the ideality contains the qualitatively opposite possibility. As soon as the productive artist must give over his own actuality, its facticity, he is no longer essentially productive; his beginning will be his end, and his first word will already be a trespass against the holy modesty of ideality” (Two Ages, p. 98; cf. From the Papers of One Still Living in Early Polemical Writings). > The mention of laughter is not a coincidence. Key to Kierkegaard’s philosophy is that the only intelligent tactical response to life’s horror is to laugh defiantly at it. Rarely has a philosopher taken humor as seriously. There is some truth to this. Kierkegaard is, among other things, a philosopher of humor (see, for example, The Humor of Kierkegaard: An Anthology, ed. Oden). But faith and love are arguably more central for him, “tactically,” than humor, though one might justifiably say, with his pseudonym Johannes Climacus, that humor is the person of faith’s “incognito” (see Concluding Unscientific Postscript, pp. 500-525). > Kierkegaard is often described as the founder of the philosophical movement known as existentialism, because in him we find all the themes that would so interest later thinkers like Sartre, Camus, and Heidegger. The book that fascinated the existentialists was Kierkegaard’s The Concept of Anxiety, published in 1844, in which he emphasized a new word: Angest (or ‘angst’ as we know it in English)—a condition where we understand how many choices we face, and how little understanding we can ever have of how to exercise these choices wisely. As Kierkegaard wrote, “Life can only be understood backwards, but must be lived forwards.” The existentialists’ fascination with Kierkegaard is hardly limited to The Concept of Anxiety — even when qualified as the work of primary interest to them. For the nature and diversity of Kierkegaard’s impact on existentialism, see Kierkegaard’s Influence on Existentialism, ed. Stewart). > Our constant angst means that unhappiness is more or less written into the script of life. As he wrote, “Anyone who has given the matter any serious thought will know that I’m right when I say it’s not possible for anyone to be absolutely and in every conceivable way completely content, not even for a single half hour of his life.” “No one has come into the world without crying. No one asks when you want to enter the world. No one asks when you want to leave.” “How empty and meaningless life is. —We bury a person, throw three shovels of earth over him, drive out in a coach, drive back in a coach, and console ourselves that we still have life enough left to live. But really, how long is three score and ten? Why not just get it over with straightaway?…” This set of three quotations is read as though it is a single quote, and as though the words belong to Kierkegaard himself. But the first is from Repetition — the words belong to Constantin Constantius. The second two quotes are taken again from the aesthete’s “Diapsalmata” (Either/Or, I, pp. 26, 29). Not only is it extremely dubious to attribute the thought of either character to Kierkegaard, we find him explicitly denying that life is intrinsically meaningless in his theological response to Schopenhauer’s pessimistic philosophy: “if to exist at all, to be a human being, is to suffer, then Christianity is robbed of its dialectic, its foreground…” (see JP 4: 3881). For Kierkegaard, it is not life in general, but specifically Christian existence, that is paradoxical. (Kierkegaard’s “absurd” is not Camus’ “absurd.”) > For Kierkegaard, there was, however, one answer that he put forward ever more stridently in his later works: Jesus Christ. Kierkegaard loathed the Christianity of the established Danish Church, but he adored the simple truths of the Gospels that his father had taught him as a boy. For him, Christianity was a religion of extreme surrender to a theology of almost peasant-like simplicity. One was to be ready to die for Christ, to give up all attachment to worldly things, and to love all humans like one’s siblings.  For Kierkegaard, Christianity is indeed a religion of “extreme surrender.” But it’s less clear that he recommends an “almost peasant-like simplicity.” Kierkegaard does maintain that there are some existential difficulties that are peculiar to living in a modern urban context (see, e.g., Works of Love, pp. 384-5), but he does not therefore recommend leaving “the turmoil of the city” and living a more “peasant-like” life, say, the life of an ascetic. Moreover, the pattern of love Kierkegaard champions is not sibling love, but the kind of self-denying love of one’s neighbor that is portrayed in the parable of the Good Samaritan (Works of Love, throughout). > Kierkegaard wasn’t interested in justifying his attachment to Christianity through rational means. Instead he recommended a dramatic and now famous “leap of faith,” wherein one wouldn’t apply one’s puny mind to attempting to prove the existence of God. One would merely switch off one’s faulty rational faculties, and jump into the idea of God as the total solution. As he put it, “To have faith is to lose your mind and to win God” [The Sickness Unto Death (1949)]. The quote is indeed from Sickness (though belongs to Kierkegaard’s Christian pseudonym Anti-Climacus). But it is also wrenched out of context (see Hongs’ trans., p. 38) and used to support the much-disputed reading of Kierkegaard as irrationalist. But Kierkegaard clearly does not believe in throwing out reason altogether: “Christianity is not some fairy tale, even though the blessedness it promises is more glorious than what the fairy tale possesses. Nor is it an ingenious fabrication that is supposed to be difficult to understand and that also insists on one condition, an idle head and an empty brain” (Works of Love, p. 70). It is also worth noting that the phrase “leap of faith” does not occur in Kierkegaard, and that the concept of “the leap” is simply the category of decision. For Kierkegaard, a leap is no less necessary for the one who posits atheism than for the one who posits theism. > Like Marxist communism, Kierkegaard’s solutions to the problems of being human are far less convincing and interesting than the diagnoses of our ills. Few of us now make that leap… That few take the leap into the religious sphere does not by itself demonstrate that Kierkegaard’s solutions are “far less convincing and interesting than his diagnoses of our ills.” Kierkegaard would likely put to us the challenge, “Convincing and interesting to whom? and according to what standard of rationality”? He might also urge that to seek “the interesting” with greater passion than we seek existential truth is to miss the point entirely. > …but Kierkegaard deserves our attention for the beautifully bitter, caustic look he casts on the human condition. He is one of the few philosophers one can turn to when the world has badly let us down, and we’re in need of a friend who can fully understand the dark places we’re in once the sentimental illusions that normally keep us going fall away. Here the bitterness of Kierkegaard is again overstated. For Kierkegaard has much to say about joy, as indicated at the start of this brief commentary. As he puts it in his journals and papers, “let us not delude ourselves into thinking that sorrow is more meritorious than joy, self-torture, etc.”; and again: “It takes moral courage to grieve; it takes religious courage to rejoice” (JP 2: 2178-9). Indeed, more than a friend who offers consolation, we find in Kierkegaard a friend who encourages us to engage in unrelenting self-interrogation, and to strive onward in love, fear and trembling, and humility’s vulnerable self-honesty.﻿